---
layout: post
title:  "Solution Costs of Isogeometric Analysis for ORNL's Computational and Applied Mathematics Group"
date:   2020-08-06
categories: jekyll update
---

I will present an analysis of the cost of multi-frontal direct and
iterative solvers when applied to linear systems resulting from a
discretized elliptic partial differential equation with the
higher-order continuous B-spline basis, popularly known as
isogeometric analysis.

Since 2005, the engineering research community has invested heavily in
the development of isogeometric analysis, originally due to a desire
to more tightly couple analysis to geometry representations, but
additionally because of many favorable qualities of the B-spline
basis. Among these is an observable improvement in the constant of the
error convergence when using the spaces to discretize partial
differential equations. This improvement grows as the polynomial order
of the space grows, reaching as large as one to two orders of
magnitude relative to the traditional finite element spaces. This
sparked great interest in using the B-spline basis as an economic high
polynomial order method.

However, this assessment ignored the differences in the costs of
solving the resulting linear systems. We found that relative to the
traditional C^0 finite element spaces, the maximally continuous
C^(p-1) basis, where p is the polynomial order of the space, is O(p^3)
times more expensive to solve when using a multi-frontal direct solver
and O(p^2) when using iterative solvers.

In this talk, I will discuss the derivation of these estimates and
present results which support the conclusions. This talk will be of
value to those interested in using isogeometric analysis in practice
or in understanding how a multi-frontal direct solver works. More
broadly, this talk advocates for a more holistic view of developing
numerical methods which includes solution costs.